---
title: Dunning-Kruger silence
date: 2025-07-30
---

I now realize that most of my unconfidence when speaking my thoughts of loud stems from a slow built-up understanding of how complex the world actually is. Of how everything we say is manmade, and only a model of real-world phenomena. Propositions stating facts fail to fully encapsulate the noumenal machinery behind what we observe. The categorization of facts into true or false is a convenience to have easier reason, manmade. Over the years, I've become more and more anti-realist, and skeptical of what can I know. Skeptical of how much bias leads to a certain belief or model, and how a model's to-human intuitiveness may not necessarily be a predictor of its correctness or accuracy. I genuinely doubt when I state things, because I think it's so hard to actually know something with certainty. And this applies especially to ML systems, which different to other fields of engineering and problem-solving, they are not rigorous, or well-understood. We simply scaled up some statistical methods, and we got what we have today. I don't know. This kind of intellectual humility is often a problem when I've genuinely need to say what I know, without doubting it every step of the way.

When someone asks me to share my thoughts on something on-the-spot, that's why I have trouble sharing. Not because I'm inherently unconfident in myself as a functioning member of society, but because I just know that whatever is going to go out my mouth is going to be plagued by biases and lack of knowledge about the topic. I just know that. So, that's also why I rarely share my opinion on topics. I just don't find I'm informed yet, on most things. Oh, but when I do think I know something, I will speak. It's just that most topics people want opinions on are inherently very complex and hard to understand, and I think people underestimate that. I think people underestimate how immensely complex it is to understand any real-world thing that is bigger than us: from biology, neurology and micro-level social interactions and psychology, to politics, macroeconomics, sociology and the full functioning of the human body.

It's just that I don't find it worth to share my view when I'm fully aware of how underdeveloped it is. And I'm not saying that because I see myself as inherently less capable for other areas outside of my professional work or hobby interest, but because I know that I haven't put in the time to actually understand them. I know because I can look at areas where I _did_ think about them for a long time, and did make some points, and reach a conclusion here and there. Maybe at least managed to frame a problem, or elaborated upon it.
